Welcome my friend to today's
lecture on verbal ability.
Let's unpack the mystery of this concept
without needing a PhD or a panic attack.
Concept explanation.
So what on earth is this verbal ability?
It's simply a person's power to understand
and effectively use the English language
in the world of competitive exams, it's
how they check your command over various
parts of the language, like grammar,
vocabulary, reading, comprehension, and
even your logical reasoning with words.
It's not just about knowing fancy
words, it's about how well you can
interpret, analyze, and communicate
information written in English.
Basically, they want to see if your
command over the language is good
enough for professional communication.
Simple, no.
Real world relevance and
why is this so important?
You ask.
Think of it this way.
Strong communication is absolutely
essential for interacting clearly
with customers and your colleagues,
helping to prevent those silly
misunderstandings in banking operations.
Then there's report writing.
It's crucial for drafting
accurate and professional
reports and official documents.
Good verbal ability also helps in
customer service, allowing you to
understand what a customer is asking
for, and responding clearly, which
builds trust and solves problems faster.
It's also vital for policy interpretation,
for making sense of complex banking
policies and regulations to ensure
you are following the rules.
And let's not forget negotiation
where it helps you articulate
your ideas persuasively.
Finally, it sharpens your problem
solving skills by enabling you
to analyze information verbally
to find the best solutions.
Breakdown of question types based
on what we've seen in past exams.
The question formats
are quite predictable.
First up is the big boss reading
comprehension or rc, which can be anywhere
from 25 to 35% of the section here.
You get questions on the passage's
main idea tone and vocabulary.
Next you have spotting errors or sentence
improvement, making up about 15 to 20%.
Then comes the close test, a classic
fill in the blanks for a whole passage
at around 10 to 15% para jumbles
or sentence rearrangement where you
put sentences in the right order.
Also take up 10 to 15%.
You'll also find fill in the
blanks or sentence completion
questions for another 10 to 15%.
Finally, smaller sections like sentence
connectors and word usage or swapping.
Make up the rest each about five to 10%.
Formulas Plus tricks.
All right, so here are the secret
formulas and tricks to ace this
section for vocabulary building.
Don't just memorize words, learn common
root words, prefixes and suffixes.
Use flashcards and try to
guess meanings from context.
For grammar mastery, focus on
the core concepts, subject, VE
agreement, tenses, parts of speech
articles, and all that good stuff.
Practice is key here for
reading comprehension.
Try active reading.
Skim the passage first for the
main idea, then read the questions
and finally go back to the
passage to find specific answers.
And please use the elimination strategy.
If you can rule out even one wrong
option, your chances of getting it
right go way up for vocabulary questions
like the close test, always look at the
surrounding words for contextual clues.
But the ultimate trick, my friend, is
consistent practice, regular practice
with all question types and timed mock
tests is the only way to truly improve.
Methods of solving.
Now, let's get into the step-by-step
methods for solving these problems,
for reading comprehension.
First, skim the passage.
Just a quick read to get
the general idea and tone.
Don't get lost in the details yet.
Second, read the questions.
This tells you exactly what to look for.
Third scan for keywords from
the question to locate the
relevant parts of the passage.
Fourth, for inference questions,
think about the implied meaning,
and finally match and verify.
Choose the option that is most
directly supported by the text
and avoid using your outside know.
For a close test, first, read the
entire passage Once without looking
at the options to get the overall
theme, then focus on each blank one
by one reading the full sentence.
Check the grammatical fit.
Do you need a noun, a verb, an adjective?
Then check the contextual fit.
Does the word make sense in the story?
You can mentally insert each option
to see which one feels right, both
grammatically and contextually.
For Para Jumbles, your first job is
to identify the opening sentence.
Look for a sentence that introduces
a new topic and can stand on its own.
Next look for connecting words like
pronouns, conjunctions, and transition.
Words that create links between sentences.
Try to form logical pairs of sentences.
Then identify the concluding sentence,
which usually summarizes the whole thing.
Finally, arrange your sentences
and read the whole paragraph
to make sure it flows smoothly.
For spotting errors or sentence
improvement, first, read the sentence
carefully to understand its meaning.
Then check the basics.
Does the subject agree with the verb?
Are the tenses consistent?
Are all parts of speech used correctly?
Look for parallelism in lists or
comparisons, and always keep an eye
out for common errors like misplaced
modifiers or redundant words.
Shortcuts and smart techniques
ready for some pro-level moves.
For rc, a smart technique is to read
the questions first before the passage.
This makes your reading
targeted for the close test.
Grasp the theme first by reading
the whole passage quickly.
This helps you pick the right words.
In para jumbles, look for mandatory pairs.
Two sentences that
absolutely must go together.
This drastically reduces your
arrangement options for error spotting.
Try a backwards scan after
reading the sentence.
Normally read it backwards,
section by section.
It sounds funny, but it breaks
the flow and makes errors pop out.
For vocabulary, use root word power,
break down unfamiliar words into
their parts, root prefix suffix
to get a clue about the meaning.
And for time management have a
strict time limit for each section.
If a question is too
hard, mark it and move on.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now, let's talk about the common traps.
Please avoid overreading in rc.
It's a huge time waster.
Another mistake is ignoring context
in close tests and just picking a
word because it fits grammatically.
Don't do blind guessing.
Always use elimination first.
A big one is just memorizing grammar
rules without knowing how to apply them.
Many friends panic when they
see an unfamiliar word, which
hurts their performance.
Don't do that.
A major problem is the lack of
timed practice, which leads to poor
time management in the actual exam.
And finally, don't rely on what just
sounds right for grammar questions.
You need to know the actual rule.
W Edge Framework Summary.
So to quickly summarize this
whole thing with a W Edge
framework, what is verbal ability?
It's the test of your
English language proficiency.
Why is it important?
It is crucial for effective
communication and clear expression
in any professional job.
When is it applied?
It's used in all sections of the
English test from RC to error spotting.
Where is it relevant?
It's needed in daily
banking, operations, customer
interactions, and writing reports.
Who needs it?
Well, every aspiring officer
and professional who needs
strong communication skills.
And how do you master it?
By mastering grammar, building,
vocabulary, and practicing with a logical
approach, fully worked out examples.
Let's look at an example
for spotting error.
Question one, identify the part of
the sentence that contains an error.
The manager A, along with
his team, BR, working hard.
C for the project D, no error E,
options A, the manager B, along
with his team CR, working hard.
D for the project E. No error.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Okay, let's break it down.
Step one is to identify the real subject.
Here, the main subject is the manager.
The phrase, along with his
team, is extra information.
It doesn't control the verb.
Step two, check, subject, verb agreement.
The manager is singular, so
the verb must also be singular.
Step three, locate the
verb, which is are working.
Step four is to spot the mismatch.
R is a plural verb, but our
subject manager is singular.
That's the error.
So step five is to correct it.
R. Working hard should
be, is working hard?
Correct?
Answer C.
Next, an example of a close test.
Question two.
Choose the most appropriate
word to fill in the blank.
The company decided.
Two dash its operations due to
severe financial difficulties.
Options A, expand B Cs
C Commence D, sustain.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's solve this.
Step one, understand the context.
The key phrase is severe
financial difficulties.
This points to something negative.
Step two, let's analyze the options.
Expand means to grow, which
is the opposite of what a
company in trouble would do.
CS means to stop, which makes sense.
With financial problems,
commence means to start again.
Illogical, sustain means to keep
going, which is what they'd want
to do, but severe difficulties
make it likely They have to take
a more drastic step like stopping.
So step three, the best fit given the
financial mess, the most logical action
is to stop operations, correct answer
B. Finally, a para jumble example.
Question three, arrange the
following sentences in a coherent
paragraph A. This led to a
significant increase in productivity.
B. The company implemented a new
training program for its employees.
C. As a result, employee
morale also improved.
D, the program focused on enhancing
their technical skills options.
A, B. D. A. C. B. B. A. D. C. C, DA,
B. CDC, BAD understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Let's reassemble this puzzle.
Step one, find the opening sentence.
Sentence B introduces the main
topic, a new training program,
so it's a perfect start.
Step two, find the next logical link.
After introducing the program in B, it
makes sense to explain what it was about.
Sentence D does exactly that, saying
the program focused on technical skills.
So we have a BD pair.
Step three, look for the result.
After implementing a program
focused on skills D, what happened?
Sentence A tells us this led to a
significant increase in productivity.
This connects directly back to bd.
Now we have B, D, a. Step four.
Look for any further consequence after
productivity increased a sentence.
C. Add that as a result,
employee morale also improved.
The word also shows it's
an additional outcome.
So the final logical sequence is BDAC.
Correct answer A. Thank you.
See.